Zac1 (#1)
zmitton/ECIPs: ECIP-template.md

## Standardize OS Level Management of Signature Handling

    ECLIP: <pending>
    Title: Standardize OS Level Management of Signature Handling
    Author: Zac Mitton
    Discussions-To: gitter username zmitton
    Status:  DRAFT
    Type: STANDARDS TRACK
    Created: 2019-02-07

## Abstract

> UX involved with handling ethereum signing is especially cumbersome. This is mostly due to the fact that dapps and wallets are used in many different *environments* (i.e. desktop, mobile, CLI, plugin, mobile-browsers desktop-browsers, and hardware). Attempts improve this UX shortcoming have generally involved rigid user work-flows, or specific application combinations. I assert the problem is best solved at the operating system level using a widely standardized protocol like the one proposed below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UX involved with handling ethereum signing is especially cumbersome. This is mostly due to the fact that dapps and wallets are used in many different *environments* (i.e. desktop, mobile, CLI, plugin, mobile-browsers desktop-browsers, and hardware). Attempts to improve this UX shortcoming have generally involved rigid user work-flows, or specific application combinations. I assert the problem is best solved at the operating system level using a widely standardized protocol like the one proposed below.
```

> The following describes (1) a protocol for dapps to use when any action requiring a signature is requested (i.e. signing a tx or typed data). This specification is orthogonal to the actual signature scheme used, but instead defines how the signer program is chosen and invoked by the user's Operating system. (2) a protocol for wallet applications to handle incoming OS requests for signature.

Reviewer: > signing a tx or typed data

`typed` here as in variables or as in keyboards?

Author: yes, I was referring to this [EIP] (https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-712.md) I should probably change it to "structured data"

Reviewer: ... as in `eth` API `type` - https://github.com/zmitton/ECIPs/pull/1/files?utf8=%E2%9C%93&diff=unified#diff-b1e2fe12008b7b75b7b787ef2f8f391cR56

> The following describes (1) a protocol for dapps to use when any action requiring a signature is requested (i.e. signing a tx or typed data). This specification is orthogonal to the actual signature scheme used, but instead defines how the signer program is chosen and invoked by the user's Operating system. (2) a protocol for wallet applications to handle incoming OS requests for signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following describes

1. A protocol for dapps to use when any action requiring a signature is requested (i.e. signing a tx or typed data). This specification is agnostic of the actual signature scheme used, but instead defines how the signer program is chosen and invoked by the user's Operating System

2. A protocol for wallet applications to handle incoming OS requests for signature.
```

Reviewer: The formatting is just a trivial nitpick, but IMO `s/orthogonal to/agnostic of/` is better.

## Motivation

> Users should be able to use any wallet of their choosing when interacting with a dapp. Having users download a specific wallet per-environment reduces security, inhibits development of ethereum integration, and is terrible UX: The user to has to top-up, back up, and not forget about the wallet. This sucks for the user because they have money all over the place. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users should be able to use any wallet of their choosing when interacting with a dapp. Having users download a specific wallet per-environment reduces security, inhibits development of ethereum integration, and is terrible UX: The user to has to top-up, back up, and not forget about the wallet. This sucks for the user because they have money all over the place and a laundry list of wallet program installations to do the work of one. 
```

## Current Scenario
#### Desktop Browser Dapps 

> So far, the best solution has been to download wallet plugins like Metamask, that inject javascript (by being granted very scary permissions) onto every single page the user navigates to. The user cannot use a hardware wallet - a huge xecurity limitation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far, the best solution has been to download wallet plugins like Metamask, that inject javascript (by being granted very scary permissions) onto every single page the user navigates to. The user cannot use a hardware wallet - a huge security limitation.
```

     
#### Mobile Browser Dapps

> The user is expected to use a specially made "web3 enebled" mobile browser (i.e. Brave, Toshi), to view the app so the dapp has available it's in-browser wallet for invocation. This is suboptimal architecture, and a waste of engineering resources. Browsers are the most complex programs of all, and building an decent one is futile (unless say, you're the inventor of Javascript). Regardless, we should not be building browsers to solve the problem of wallets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user is expected to use a specially made "web3 enabled" mobile browser (i.e. Brave, Toshi), to view the app so the dapp has available it's in-browser wallet for invocation. This is suboptimal architecture, and a waste of engineering resources. Browsers are extraordinarily complex programs, and building a decent one is an overwhelmingly monumental challenge (unless say, you're the inventor of Javascript). Regardless, we should not be building browsers to solve the problem of wallets.
```

> to view the app so the dapp has available

I would pick one or make it clear why you're using both.

#### Native Dapps (the worst UX of all)

> Currently if a mobile app developer wants to integrate an ethereum feature in their app, they have to build a wallet into their app itself, from scratch. The user ends up with loose change in siloed apps, and these wallets will have pathetic security standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, if a mobile app developer wants to integrate an ethereum feature in their app, they have to build a wallet into their app itself, from scratch. The user ends up with loose change in siloed apps, and these wallets will have pathetic security standards.
```

## Desired UX Flow
Before defining the proposed spec, I'd like to outline the _ideal_ user experience, and work backwards to achieve it. After all, thats how this spec came about.

If the dapp is browser-based, the user can browse to it using ANY available browser on mobile or desktop.

If the dapp is a native mobile or native desktop app, they can download then open the application.

> When the dapp requires signature it should pull up the user's preferred mobile wallet when on mobile or [desktop or hardware] wallet when on desktop. The wallet should be able to show details of the signing request. The user can then tap or click "sign" and be sent back to the dapp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the dapp requires a signature it should open the user's preferred mobile wallet when on mobile, or [desktop or hardware] wallet when on desktop. The wallet should be able to show details of the signing request. The user can then tap or click "sign" and be sent back to the dapp.
```

## Rationale

> Its time we realize that this problem must be addressed at the _Operating System_ level. For this is the only way to flexibly handoff control to another app. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its time we realize that this problem must be addressed at the _Operating System_ level, because this is the only way to flexibly hand off control to another app. 
```

## How

> _Deep linking_ is a method available from any application or webpage that tells the user's operating system to open a specific application (and can also carry metadata with the request to open a specified page and even populate data). They work in basically all environments. Android, IOS, macOS, Windows, and hopefully others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Deep linking_ is a method available from any application or webpage that provides the user's operating system with instructions to open a specific application (and can carry metadata with the request, in order, for example, to open a specified page, and even populate data). They work in basically all environments: Android, iOS, macOS, Windows, and hopefully others.
```

> However, deep links usually open a _specific_ application, and we dont want our dapps to have to specify i.e. toshi, or jaxx, or gnosis-safe. Rather we need some way to tell the operating system to open the user's "_default Ethereum signer_".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, deep links usually open a _specific_ application, and we don't want our dapps to have to specify i.e. Toshi, or Jaxx, or Gnosis-Safe. Rather we need some way to tell the operating system to open the user's "_default Ethereum signer_".
```

> Such a thing is possible but it depends on the OS. On IOS it can be done with NSUrl Protocol, which is implemented as a link but instead of a opening a specific app, you specify a name space (i.e. "ethereum-signer") to which any app can register itself to be a handler. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is possible, but implementation by OS. On iOS it can be done with NSUrl Protocol, which is implemented as a link, but instead of a opening a specific app, you specify a name space (e.g. "ethereum-signer") to which any app can register itself as a handler. 
```

> All apps on the device that have registered to be handler will call a boolean function as to whether or not the app would like to handle this request (perhaps true iff the user has chosen this wallet as default). The first app to return true from this function will be launched with access to data from the URL (the rpc data and/or more). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All apps on the device registered as a handler will call a boolean function deciding whether or not the app should handle the incoming request (perhaps true iff the user has chosen this wallet as default). The first app to return `true` from this function will be launched with access to data from the URL (the rpc data and/or more). 
```

Does the app also get the URL itself? Is this metadata in the request header?

Supporting Links:

[ECIP 1037 -- Simple Non-Interactive URI Scheme](https://github.com/ethereumproject/ECIPs/pull/81)

[EIP 67 -- Standard URI scheme with metadata value and byte code](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/67)

[EIP 681 -- Payment request URL specification](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/681)

[EIP 831 -- Standard URL Format](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/831)

[URI Schemes](https://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes/uri-schemes.xhtml)

<!-- 
#### User Experience
Most users will download 1 mobile ethereum wallet and enjoy a consistent experience with every dapp. some will probably still use a plugin like metamask when on desktop and power users will use a hardware wallet for high security as needed.

#### Developer Experience
The integration of "Ethereum features" will become much easier for devs, and be a much greater sell with this protocol. The developer has to do less work. And the supported user-base is larger (many more users can be expected to have _a_ wallet, as opposed to some specific wallet)

> 

Reviewer: I think these are strong points, and worth including above ;)

Author: yeah im trying to figure out where to say this. I'll take another look

If the dapp is a native mobile or native desktop app, they can download then open the application.

When the dapp requires a signature it should open the user's preferred mobile wallet when on mobile, or [desktop or hardware] wallet when on desktop. The wallet should be able to show details of the signing request. The user can then tap or click "sign" and be sent back to the dapp.

## Rationale
Its time we realize that this problem must be addressed at the _Operating System_ level, because this is the only way to flexibly hand off control to another app. 

## How
_Deep linking_ is a method available from any application or webpage that provides the user's operating system with instructions to open a specific application (and can carry metadata with the request, in order, for example, to open a specified page, and even populate data). They work in basically all environments: Android, iOS, macOS, Windows, and hopefully others.

However, deep links usually open a _specific_ application, and we don't want our dapps to have to specify i.e. Toshi, or Jaxx, or Gnosis-Safe. Rather we need some way to tell the operating system to open the user's "_default Ethereum signer_".

> This is possible, but implementation by OS. On iOS it can be done with NSUrl Protocol, which is implemented as a link, but instead of a opening a specific app, you specify a name space (e.g. "ethereum-signer") to which any app can register itself as a handler. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is possible, but implementation by OS. On iOS it can be done with [NSURL Protocol](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nsurlprotocol), which is implemented as a link, but instead of a opening a specific app, you specify a name space (e.g. "ethereum-signer") to which any app can register itself as a handler. 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

On Desktop this can be accomplished by registering it with the OS, for example using [electrons protocol API](https://electronjs.org/docs/api/protocol). And In the browser this can be implemented via your website [registering a custom protocol handler](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2011/06/Registering-a-custom-protocol-handler).

```

However, deep links usually open a _specific_ application, and we don't want our dapps to have to specify i.e. Toshi, or Jaxx, or Gnosis-Safe. Rather we need some way to tell the operating system to open the user's "_default Ethereum signer_".

This is possible, but implementation by OS. On iOS it can be done with [NSURL Protocol](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundation/nsurlprotocol), which is implemented as a link, but instead of a opening a specific app, you specify a name space (e.g. "ethereum-signer") to which any app can register itself as a handler. 

On Desktop this can be accomplished by registering it with the OS, for example using [electrons protocol API](https://electronjs.org/docs/api/protocol). And In the browser this can be implemented via your website [registering a custom protocol handler](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2011/06/Registering-a-custom-protocol-handler).

> All apps on the device registered as a handler will call a boolean function deciding whether or not the app should handle the incoming request (perhaps true iff the user has chosen this wallet as default). The first app to return `true` from this function will be launched with access to data from the URL (the rpc data and/or more). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All apps on the device registered as a handler will call a boolean function deciding whether or not the app should handle the incoming request (perhaps true if the user has chosen this wallet as default). The first app to return `true` from this function will be launched with access to data from the URL (the rpc data and/or more). 
```

Author: actually I meant if and only if :)

Reviewer: :neckbeard:

## Specification WIP
Im thinking the name space should indicate fundamentally that its doing the _signing_. So ethereum-signer is one idea. However, many walet apps support multiple currencies and this architectural pattern will be valid for them as well. For that reason I suggest the scheme `signer` and the path to be `ethereum` (together `signer://ethereum`...). the path can be used by the wallet in its boolean function to determine whether it's capable of handling this particular signing request. Then we need a way to tell the wallet exactly waht to do:

Currently we use rpc to tell signers how to behave. Ethereum has at least 2 popular ones `eth_sign` and `eth_signTypedData`. I think a good format would be to keep the jsonrpc call as is (simply uri_encode the json) but to define it as just one variable of the "query" string (...`?rpc=%7B%22`... ). This way the spec can allow custom variables (like ...`?shouldSendTx=true`...) by simply tacking them on to the query string. Here is an example all together:

```

> signer://ethereum?rpc=%7B%22jsonrpc%22%3A%222.0%22%2C%22method%22%3A%22eth_getSign%22%2C%22params%22%3A%5B%220xc45bc213664f565324ad302d187e0dc08ad7d1c57%22%5D%2C%22id%22%3A67%7D?shouldSendTx=true?functionSignature=deposit%28uint256%29

Reviewer 3: IMO we should be looking to what we have setup for emerald around this, as it is rooted in some pre-existing EIPs and ECIPs. 

https://github.com/ETCDEVTeam/emerald-js/blob/master/packages/emerald-js/src/transactionUri.js

I would love to replace the `to` section with the action instead though, for example,

`ethereum://transaction?{...txData}&{...metadata??}`

Reviewer 3: As far as using `signer://`, Im not completely sold.

I'd love for this to handle things other than signing, at some point. Also, the term singing doesn't imply that it may also send transactions as well as things like query balance, choose address/login patterns, etc etc.

Author: im used signer because we can actually abstract this to handle any cryptocurrency. The ECLIP is really about how to _ invoke a signer_.  I'd considering changing it to `invoke-signer:` or something like it. 
> I'd love for this to handle things other than signing, at some point. 

Yes I totally agree. I used `signer`, not `sign`, because its relevant to any action that would require a "signer" - software capable of creating signatures. bascially an synonym for "wallet" but i "signer" seemed more general as MetaMask I know avoids using the term wallet.

 When asking to choose addresses you are not _signing_ but you are getting them from the thing that is _capable of signing_ (the signer), because they later they will be requested to be signed. 
> Also, the term singing doesn't imply that it may also send transactions as well as things like query balance, choose address/login patterns, etc etc.

I was thinking when the _signer_ is _invoked_ for an ethereum tx specifically, and have the signer actually _send_ the tx to the network itself,  we can fit that into the spec like this:
```
invoke-signer://?rpc=<eth_sign>&send=true&returnTo=<dapp-URL>
```

```
Leaving the rpc call embedded, allows developers to continue to use existing tools for formating and decoding transactions and signatures. Using query string format for arbitrary variables will allow experimentation with new features that can be ignored by non-supporting wallets. For instance, I'd like wallets to eventually be sent the `contractCode` and `compilerVerion` so they can verify the code and ABI. But I would not like to define any of that into the spec right now. Over time we can standardize certain variable names.

Supporting Links:

[ECIP 1037 -- Simple Non-Interactive URI Scheme](https://github.com/ethereumproject/ECIPs/pull/81)

[EIP 67 -- Standard URI scheme with metadata value and byte code](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/issues/67)

[EIP 681 -- Payment request URL specification](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/681)

[EIP 831 -- Standard URL Format](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/831)

[URI Schemes](https://www.iana.org/assignments/uri-schemes/uri-schemes.xhtml)

<!-- 

> #### User Experience

Reviewer 3: One part of the emerald wallet protocol handler POC we did that was missing was investigating a call back system / spec around this.

once the user clicks the link, our app would just poll for the TX on chain. This works fine, but ideally there would be some way for the dapp and the users wallet to communicate in a 2 way fashion.

One avenue we explored was the fact that a protocol handler can return multiple data types to the browser, one of which being html / text. The idea would be to post back with a script that would then post a message back to the dapp, allowing the wallet to notify the dapp of particular states, such as 'tx cancelled' or others.

Author: interesting. I would tend toward the side of leaving that more open, (as to what method the dapp would choose to consider a tx _confirmed_ or sufficient to move forward). There definitely needs to be a way to communicate back to the dapp though.

It might be useful to define a little bit of that but in an extremely un-opinionated way. For instance the return data could be specified or even the confirm time could be handled by the signer.
```
invoke-signer://ethereum?rpc=<eth_sign>&send=true&returnData=[txhash, fromAddress]&confirmationsRequired=10
```

I don't think we should try to standardize any of that yet though. The objective is the have an easy way to extend extra features (standard `?=&` syntax) so the software in both dapps and wallets will have the right MVP, while experimenting with other features.

It would seem that MVP is the signing software being invoked, the wallet displaying the requested action, the user confirming it, and then the wallet returning with data to the caller.

Most of the other standards fit into this broader one, and I guess it would also be prudent to define how the other specs would look in the context of this one.
